# Intellectual Property Is Becoming Irrelevant

<img alt="Would you do it?" src="/assets/images/downloadacar.png" style="height: 15em;">

Or would you?

Experiencing another surge in NFT demand, we now logically see
all sorts of companies publishing their latest tech research on how to register
and trade intellectual property (short "IP") on-chain. The main idea they all
follow is:

- Register or "anchor" an IP's manifestation on-chain. And then; through its
  distinct registration;
- make it tradable as an NFT on platforms like [OpenSea](https://opensea.io/)
  for speculation or consumption.

If you're a reader of my blog - by now I think you've gotten the hints that I'm
not a believer. In my last post, I said that "[NFTs are coming for
Instagram and other social media
platforms](https://timdaub.github.io/2021/07/21/nfts-are-coming-for-instagram/)"
and that their [provenance can be tampered
with](https://timdaub.github.io/2021/04/22/nft-sleepminting-beeple-provenance/).
I'm tripling down. NFTs have nothing to do with the legal concept of
intellectual property. Putting IP on the blockchain is missing the point.
Nobody needs that.

But I'm discontent even further with the space's view on intellectual property.
From a philosophical point of view mainly. Let me explain.

### Been there, done that

Five years ago, I co-authored a document on intellectual property licensing and
blockchain. As this work ended up being published in the COALA working group,
we called it the "[COALA IP Specification](https://github.com/COALAIP/specs)."

I'll spare you the long read and say: it's essentially a year's worth of
research on intellectual property licensing and how organizations manage to
digitize it in data structures. The document ended up being a self-glorified
and unfinished recommendation for how to most generically model data structures
that encompass all sorts of legal concepts and how to store those on
blockchain-ish systems.

Today, I'd argue that the specification's value didn't lie in creating the
document itself - albeit it now has over 100 stars on GitHub (lol). Instead, I
think most valuable about the effort was accumulating the experience of
promoting and writing about the concept. Here's why:

The specification itself just tries to piece together a data model from, at the
time, commonly appreciated frameworks. Many of us were into ontologies and
linked data. It's why the spec is heavily reliant on schema.org, JSON Linked
Data, and other "promising" technologies that ended up nowhere.
However, it defined two concepts that have become widely adopted in
decentralized apps:

- The anchoring of data to prove its existence at a specific moment in time.
- The mapping of some internal blockchain functionalities onto legal contracts
  (e.g., transferring an NFT means "transfer of IP rights").

Curiously, a subset of the problems we tried to solve were later addressed by
practical implementations like [Zora](https://zora.co), [Ocean
Protocol](https://oceanprotocol.com/) and [OpenSea](https://opensea.io/). Their
core functionality deliberately doesn't rely on intellectual property licensing
for achieving functionality. Instead they've made it irrelevant by smartly
applying emerging technologies.

![Zora.co is a "Decentralized Auction Protocol" - take that boomers!](/assets/images/zora.png)

So why is it that the COALA IP approach never struck a nerve? I'd say that it's
because it never managed to capture the Internet's Zeitgeist. And because it
applied the intellectual concept too directly.

### Zeitgeist? "Did you mean _timeghost_?"

By now it should have become clear that our technology visionaries aren't
venturing towards a perfectly interoperable system regarding adjacent
technologies and institutions. A smart contract has intentionally nothing to do
with a paper contract. Sure, occasionally, there's another one of these boring
blockchain conference panels where the same people discuss the meaning of "code
is law" for the seven-hundredths time - but on a technical level, truly nobody
cares about establishing compatibility.

!["Code is law" (short: "Coleslaw")](/assets/images/coleslaw.jpeg)

But that's true also for the system's users. For the most part, the internet
has stopped caring about intellectual property. There's no angry Metallica
frontman that wants to stop us from [downloading
cars](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HmZm8vNHBSU). And there are also no law
firms wanting thousands of dollars because you accidentally seeded an mp3 for a
night. You just use Netflix and Spotify.

It's simply that the idea of what constitutes "online media" has shifted from
something object-like or file-like to something performance-like. We've
accepted that the concept of materiality isn't useful in bits and only
applicable in atoms.

But in the wonderful world of copyright, things haven't shifted that much.
Here, from immaterial sources, material goods can be produced by printing paper
with black English letters and by using magical physical signatures and stamps.
Ink, ... fucking stamps? How do they work???

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8bhYMnHb5JY" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Instead of dealing with the shortcomings of this annoying piece of legacy, the
industries of intellectual properties have moved on to different things.
Brand-building and brand deals, advertisements, mainly performance-based and
ephemeral outputs. Remember when it was cool to catch the drum stick of your
favorite rock band's drummer? No? Well, me neither.

Personally, all creators I care about today: I've never even met them. I've
never possessed any material or object-like piece of them. I don't even feel
like wanting to either. I don't worship their work for their objective output
like I did years ago when I went to the store to buy me the new Linkin Park LP.

Instead, these days, fandom has become an act of engagement. I help to enhance
my favorite artist's performance online. I promote, react, mention, share, and
like their content.

### We need new tools

I also can't blame anyone for making the same mistakes I did when first wanting
to make the internet more creator-friendly. As a developer, if you'd look into
how intellectual property is laid out from a legal perspective, inevitably,
you'd come up with a solution that anchors and maps actions onto blockchain
functions.

However, it's important to realize that this way of looking at intellectual
property is becoming irrelevant today. Sure, you can say: "_But this is
literally how all the industry works right now!_" and you wouldn't be wrong.
But it'd also show that you're ignoring the reality of what it means to create
today. Creation transferred from an act of materialization to a performance.

In open-source, a public repository is just as useful as its community of
maintainers. On Youtube, TikTok, Instagram, and Twitch you'll only find success
through building a permanent online personality. Clubhouse is for sharing hot
air and that is the definition of ephermeral.

Almost no creators' works are truly protected by copyright and intellectual
property licensing. Mostly, they're protected by the creator's aura of
authenticity and by owning and monetizing an audience. Sure - occasionally, a
video can end up in places where it shouldn't. And it's then rightfully
disputed through the platform's mechanism. But let's be real: The platform's
motivation, at that point, is rather upkeeping of consistency than righting a
wrongful IP licensing.

IP is mostly irrelevant.

Given the Internet's real-time nature, I think we'll see even more tools emerge
that monkeypatch the legal licensing of digital artifacts.

---

_**please consider subscribing to my news letter if you enjoyed reading this
piece**_

---

published 2021-08-22 by timdaub
