# Harberger Taxes can be Crypto's Sustainable Business Model

Harberger taxes, or "partial common ownership" as Eric Posner and Glen Weyl
call it in "Radical Markets," is an ideal business model for decentralized
autonomous organizations (short: DAO). As it connects a mandatory non-zero
percentage fee as a fundamental incentive mechanisms for truthfully
self-assessing property value a Harberger tax market:

- may provide a sustainable funding resource to the protocol developer; while
- Incentivizing all "partial common" owners to truthfully self-assess property
  prices.

Open source code and the possibility of forking a codebase made rentism both
highly monopolistic and difficult to pull off for developers sustainably; There
are countless sunset, market-broken products.

The Harberger tax creates a non-forkable "necessary evil" with the potential to
fund future app or protocol development. And more: Harberger tax doesn't clash
with security laws (at least that's my non-lawyer opinion).

It almost seems too good to be true: but is Harberger tax really a DAO's ideal
business model?

Before I dive in, however, if you want to educate yourself on Harberger taxes
and partial common ownership, I recommend looking at [Radical Exchange's
concept
page](https://www.radicalxchange.org/concepts/partial-common-ownership/), as I
won't go into explaining how it works.

## Harberger Taxes Aren't Securities (I think...).

Hey, I'm not a lawyer, of course. But Harberger taxes do not even closely
resemble tokens. Having spent some time [coding them in
Solidity](https://github.com/rugpullindex/libharberger), I'm confident in
saying that tokens aren't necessarily required.

My personal story that got me into researching Harberger taxes in the first
place was all the work I had done with
[rugpullindex.com](https://rugpullindex.com), my side project.

As with Ocean Protocol, users started being able to upload and fractionalize
their business's data using ERC20 tokens; I had the idea of building "the S&P
500 for data sets" (said project, Rug Pull Index). However, in a painful lesson
much later, I learned that the legal landscape for launching tokens in Germany
was uncertain.

Sure, I could have launched in Singapore and all that jazz. But given that I'd
like to fundamentally comply with the German laws and additionally, since I
truly believe in the possibility of launching a decentralized autonomous
organization through extralegal mechanisms - the thought of properly
incorporating always felt wrong.

I thought that if I "dao," I wanna properly "dao" - ideally as a general
partnership between contributors - or with as little institutionalized power as
necessary.

In a similar vein to the above story, to reach further independence from having
Rug Pull Index funded through monthly OceanDAO grants proposals, naturally, I
once played with the idea of launching RPI's database as a data token myself.
Had it gone well, so I thought, I could use the token's price appreciation as a
funding mechanism for future development.

But was I really going to risk my legal status to sell a mediocre dataset as a
fractionalized access token? Spoiler: I wasn't.

## Playing Harberger Games

At first, the realization made me sad and I felt victimized: "Why could I not
simply launch a token?" But, realizing my unique position, I decided to keep
pushing and eventually started to think of my token constraint as an edge.

My thinking is, that since I'm putting myself out of the available comfort
zone, necessarily my brain will eventually start developing ideas to solve the
problem.

However, throughout that process, I didn't only come to see that it was legally
cumbersome launching an ERC20 token - I also realized that such a financial
instrument might not serve my project as the necessary vehicle for pushing it
forward.

Instead, I learned that [tokens might be
harmful](/2021/10/31/tokens-considered-harmful/), that
[they don't automatically incentivize everyone to do the right
thing](/2021/12/15/token-holders-arent-slaying-moloch/),
and that [being intrinsically motivated is more valuable than being
incentivized](/2021/10/21/on-chain-the-emperor-wears-no-clothes/).

Simultaneously, through [working on
StrikeDAO](/2022/03/27/the-user-experience-problems-of-quadratic-voting/),
I also became more interested in Weyl and Posner's work: "Radical Markets"; I
got re-introduced to Harberger taxes. And then it clicked.

## I thought Sustainable Business Models in Crypto were Impossible

See, I had always been fascinated with "making it" in crypto, given the unique
dynamics of the space.

Mixing money-making and open-source seemed fascinating; it _is_ fascinating
because it combines the rigorous transparency of the open-source community with
the mandated scrutiny of public-facing financial institutions.

In 2018, when I, too, had been working on decorating the original Ocean
Protocol whitepaper, my biggest questions had been around the market's
sustainability or, more generally, how any decentralized app was supposed to
make money.

At the time, it seemed an impossible proposition: Since crypto happened mostly
on an extralegal plane and since open source licensing wasn't even necessarily
defendable, e.g., when Sushiswap forked Uniswap, I thought that finding a
sustainable business model in crypto was a feat of impossibility.

My thinking had been that if any DAO would start inserting a fee into their
code, then logically, someone else could come along, fork the code base and
compete with the original's higher fee.

A few months ago, if you had asked me, I would have told you that there's
(practically) no way someone could sustainably seek rent in open source or the
cryptocurrency space.

## Harberger Taxes can be a Sustainable Crypto Business Model.

Today, better understanding Harberger taxation: I'm reconsidering this view.

I think that if someone can find a property class subject to fundamental
monopoly dynamics, a type of property with qualities as land on Earth displays
it. Then, if that individual can create a partial common ownership market
around it, they will be able to reap the tax income's benefits to develop the
protocol further.

It's because, fundamentally, with Harberger taxes, we want the self-assessment
tax to be non-zero (to avoid property becoming private) but at the same time
optimized for the right property turnover rate.

To create the desired positive externality for all market participants, a
Harberger tax must both be non-zero but also not too expensive.

Contrary to taxing markets with non-mandatory fees (e.g. through naive
rent-seeking), Harberger's tax is fundamentally an incentive mechanism - with
the actual income generated from the tax collection being technically a
_by-product_.

Creating a Harberger tax property market is sustainable as competitive "market
breakers" can't simply clone the product and lower the fees - the best turnover
rate producers and market maintainers in a partial common ownership world would
financially outcompete copycats.

Harberger taxes, and in general, the proposals in Radical Markets are exciting
new ideas for [the nutritious substrate that are smart
contracts](2022/02/28/smart-contracts-are-programmable-commons/). I'm excited
to see more of them in action!

---

published 2022-03-28 by timdaub
