# What happened at Gitcoin's Schelling Point event?

I'm writing these lines with severe dark circles induced by
+7h jetlag and intense crypto conference networking.
Today's my second day in Denver, and by being an early
bird, I got the chance to participate in Gitcoin's
ETHDenver satellite event called "Schelling Point." In this
post, as in the one yesterday, I reflect on my experiences
at the event.

I'll start with my day's first highlight, which was the
building the event took place. Called "the Sports Castle,"
and indeed seemingly passing the "castle glance," is a
building on Denver's capitol hill that, on closer internal
inspection, turns out to be a converted parking garage-made
event venue.

While the first floor's low ceiling makes for a partially
awkward viewing experience of the stage, the former vehicle
ramps and the building's compactness create an interesting
event vibe. Walking through cheaply assembled crypto
startup booths in a former parking garage made my mind
wander.

But Am I now doing architecture reviews? Yes and no. I
think I want to mention the space's feel as I found it to
be comically opposed to the space's ascribed value. I've
overheard today that Ethereum's chain alone harbors over
$2T in assets today: And still, its community meets in an
abandoned parking garage.

More importantly, though, this image of technical
misappropriation, although that term may be too negatively
connotated in the English language, provides an interesting
segue into some conversations I overheard today: Namely
that the crypto-verse and particularly Ethereum with its
programmable money allows developers to create
non-skeuomorphic digital experiences. So if in the real
world, a parking garage can become a crypto event's venue,
why shouldn't Bored Apes take Rolex's place?

This idea was further underlined by the event's
participants and some conversations I had. While there's a
mutual understanding that buying digital sneakers for a
metaverse pod is rather skeuomorphic, that line of thinking
isn't representative of the fact that on the metaverse, you
can be anything: even a boat that chooses to wear Nike's.

But it's true: Within the blockchain, given our hyper
normalized suffering, we've re-built private property laws
skeumorphically. User's don't have to occupy the property
to continue owning it; it can't and must not be taken away
forcefully. The individual and their consent ultimately
determine pricing before the sale. As a Harberger
maximalist, what comes to mind then is that we've
reimplemented private property monopolies without truly
ever questioning them. So indeed, it is time to dare and
design non-skeuomorphism.

I, for one, appreciate the call for "getting weird(er)"
[again] and the renewed commitment of the space to both
empirical test and theoretically research what works.
Besides that, I didn't take much more from Vitalik's talk.
He should have mentioned, though, that what they've all
done with shipping ETH2.0 is a great example of both
empirical and theoretical work going hand-in-hand. Kudos to
everyone that worked on ETH2. You're about to make it!

Today's event at Denver's Sports Castle was incredibly
intense and worthwhile the visit. I hate to reduce it to
the following, but after two years of not making the crazy
crypto conference mingling experience, I can proudly say
that today, though I'm incredibly exhausted, I feel
accomplished and happy for having been able to participate.
This felt great!

And in case they've been recorded and will be released
online, I can recommend the following talks:

- Vitalik's keynote speech on empirical and theoretical work
- Beth Mccarthy's "Building regenerative culture."
- The panel on "Regenerative Cryptoeconomics."
- Glen Weyl's talk on "Plurality."

If you've enjoyed reading this post, consider checking out yesterday's, too,
"[My First Day at BUIDLWEEK &
ETHDENVER.](/2022/02/16/ethdenver-buidl-week-day-one/)"

---

published 2022-02-17 by timdaub
