# On Eating (with) the Rich

When we went to the south of France for a beach holiday vacation a while back,
we did the usual tourist program: Visiting Nice, visiting Cannes, and enjoying
the riviera's beaches. Already arriving at the airport, I got this sense of
conspiracy; when exiting the terminal, I saw a sign saying: "Helicopter taxi to
Monaco." And so this meant the whole trip's baseline became investigating,
observing, and hypothesizing: "Is this where the rich eat? Does this shop sell
expensive clothes? Surely, in this tinted-glass limousine, a rich person is
being driven to their villa!"

Indeed, when we strolled the shops in Cannes waterside, they were all there:
Gucci, Louis Vuitton, Bottega Venetia. We saw shirts and small bags offered in
the window for an easy 5000€, so we were sure: This is it! It must be where the
rich people go shopping! But then, on another day in the evening, we did a hike
around Cap d'Antibes, towards a beach called "Bay of Antibes Billionaires."

On our way to the trail, again, we saw big houses: What we considered villas.
We were amazed how nice people had it here and that, slightly down from where
they lived, they surely could have easy access to the water. We also came
across a beach club, and here we also concluded that: truly, this must be it!
Where all the rich hang out. After all, the food prices in that restaurant were
really high, like double or triple what we'd be willing to pay! Until when we
started hitting the trail around Chateau de la Garoupe and other properties, it
dawned on us that the wall left to the path wasn't a high-security military
area. All these CCTV cameras didn't protect a natural sanctuary of birds: They
were part of the security apparatus of Roman Arkadjewitsch Abramowitsch's
now-seized residence on the Côte d'Azur.

And so, needing roughly 1-2 hours just to circle the entire property, we
logically had a lot of time to reflect and discuss. I realized how foolish it
had been to conspiratively look "for rich people" on the streets of Antibes and
Cannes. In shops and restaurants. The sheer size of the facility proved: Those
people aren't among us mere mortals, and they are certainly not to be found
ordering from a menu or buying Versace in a waterside shop. Hiking along the
publicly-accessible trail, I felt embarrassed - but not only because I had been
so foolish and naive. But also because it felt like I had trespassed into a
territory and had seen things I wasn't supposed to. Had I indulged too much in
unreflected voyeurism?

I don't know. But what I know is that this hike changed my perspective. It
taught me that my peers desire to ascend and have a say in the world and that
people who shop 5000€ handbags in the streets of Cannes aren't really the
problem. Instead, the problems accumulate among those who can afford to buy
entire peninsulas that take two hours to encircle. Those who dominate and
corrupt nation-states and those that live a lifestyle not even conceivable by
mere mortals like me. Those that wage wars and finance their godlike island
utopias on the backs of the people below them.
