# When Scope Blows Up

In software engineering, there's an infamous but reoccurring situation, I think
is relatable for every developer and project manager. You're never safe from
it. It can assault you at any moment: During a peaceful standup, when reading
issues on GitHub, or during lunch with co-workers. It's when **the scope blows
up** having crept into your project's issues and code - mercilessly expanding
and driving everyone nuts: **"OMG, WE HAVE SCOPE CREEP!"**

![](/assets/images/shockedstoner.gif)

First, let's take a step back and define what is meant by scope creep.
Intentionally, I'll focus on defining it from a manager's perspective because
that's where I suspect it originates. So what is scope? I'd say that scope is
the sum of all things needed to deliver a software product given a specific set
of expectations and a date.

If we want to build an instant messenger app, its scope would likely encompass
a feature that allows sending messages to others. Maybe it'd include sending
smilies. Or photos. But what about voice calls? Well, that's where thinking in
terms of scope becomes useful. If we deem that voice calls aren't part of our
product offerings, we'd consider it **"out of scope."** That's when we'd say
that "we've discovered scope creep" or that "scope is blowing up."

It's curious to see that the English Wikipedia article for [Scope (project
management)](<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scope_(project_management)&oldid=1016322255>)
is tiny, considering how fundamental the concept seems to be in software
engineering these days. Given this lack of rigid facts, however, I feel happy
to just reason from my experience in the extension of this article. Continuing,
I'll just shoot from the hip.

![](/assets/images/shootingfromthehip.png)

Here's a non-verified claim: Scope creep is subject to Murphy's law. So if
scope can increase, it will increase. I'm not sure why that is, and indeed some
behavioral psychologists have one day have an excellent explanation; but for
now, you'll have to take it for what I've observed. I've said - when scope
creeps, it's when everyone loses their minds.

But why? What is so bad about scope creep that people blame it for their
company's failure, for leaving a job, or for burning out? It sure sounds like
it encompasses incredible risk. And I think it does.

For a project manager and their team that's bound to deliver a roadmap, scope
creep can make them look like failures and potentially lead to them missing out
on future funding. Scope creep can mean the end of a project.

It's because for outsiders, given a lack of equal distribution of information
about the project's challenges, scope creep can look like a team is failing or
having lost focus. "Why are they not able to deliver their roadmap?", "This one
feature, what does it have to do with the product's main value proposition?"
"It looks like they're failing."

![](/assets/images/spongebobchaos.gif)

While, of course, from the inside, things can look dramatically different.
Scope creep is seldom god's irrational punishment for the team's sins (_lol
dunno why I wrote that_). Indeed, scope creep may just be the difference
between expectations and reality. It may just be a specific lack of
information. It may be a few thousand missing in the budget or the lack of a
specific team mate.

I don't think, however, that scope creep is ever unjustified. Every scope
creeper has a reason for creeping. It may be that their proposal is flawed and
unnecessarily blown up. But ultimately, assuming that all contributors are
good-natured towards the project, I've made the experience that a scope creeper
(a person that blows up scope) is looking at the problem from a unique point of
view and is seeing something others aren't.

I'd argue that as software engineers, we should embrace blowing up scope more.
And we should learn to work with it. I know it sounds crazy, but your software
management process can adapt to extracting immense value from knowledge
processes by appropriately managing creeping scope.

I encourage you to think about scope creep like this: It's when you found a
problem so vast and sinister that none of your team dares to face and slay it.
It may be so huge; other teams may not dare to confront it either. Hell, it may
be so colossal NOBODY HAS EVER dared.

But in turn, what does this mean economically? It means that you're leaving
value behind. See, today's internet is oversaturated with life hacks,
workarounds, and quick fixes. It's good because it lets you focus on the task
at hand. It's bad because it makes us believe that focusing on the short-term
is appropriate for solving problems. We're leaving value behind, an example:

Maybe you've used a tool like docker before, and given its complexity, at one
point, you discovered this annoying bug. You could solve it yourself - but you
fear it'd blow up your project's scope.

Upon searching the web, you find a GitHub issue created two years ago. It now
has 1000 comments, and you scroll down to find the most appropriate workaround
that fits your project's needs.

Now, considering that 1000 people each wasted one hour of their work time
looking at this issue, I think it's easy to estimate the problem's weight.
Hypothetically, would you solve it: It'd mean you could cash-in on saving a
thousand well-paid developers one hour. Undoubtedly that's a massive amount of
money.

The problem is: You cannot because it'd mean to blow up your job's scope ten or
a thousandfold. _And that's where I see an issue._

Assuming you'd be able to solve the issue on a technical and economic level,
you'd progress in your career. But it's not possible - as there's neither
unlimited budget on your project nor enough time or talent to subsidize you.
So, inevitably, you'll hence go for the short-term workaround.

With all that in mind, I still think there's the chance to discover a
deliberate practice to face scope creep more adventurously. Some scope creeps
will inevitably make the project fail - even if handled carefully. Others -
when solved correctly - may enrich your product and give you the right edge
over the competition. What I believe should be avoided, though, is a compulsion
and unjustified caution towards scope's increase.

You can think of solving a problem like traversing a tree or diving into a
reef. You can go breadth-first or depth-first. Your mind is capable of
back-tracking too. And even having traveled deeply, reality often offers the
opportunity to resurface and take a breather before going down again.

So go out there young padawan - blow up some scopes!

![](/assets/images/mindblown.gif)

---

published 2021-06-18 by timdaub
