# Is Competition for Losers?

A common believe in the startup scene is that competition is for losers and
that one always should setup shop in a "[blue
ocean](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blue_Ocean_Strategy&oldid=1029136391)"
rather than a "red ocean."

There are countless famous proponents like Peter Thiel arguing publicly about
the virtues of positioning oneself in a competitionless market rather than
trying to fight for scarce resources.

But "is competition _really_ for losers?", I asked myself when swimming
in one of the croweded and fast-paced lanes of a public pool today.

See, for the first time in months, this morning I visited a public swimming
pool again. Given that during the pandemic those only had limited
availability, my summer consisted mostly swimming in many of the nice lakes
around Berlin. Now that fall and winter are around the corner, today I thought:
Why not train indoor again.

If you've ever swum freestyle in the fast lane of a public swimming pool, you
probably know your fellow swimmers aren't joking around. They're usually super
fit, have amazing technique and they absolutely don't shy back from overtaking
you mid-lane. They don't do it for a prize or praise. They just do it. To train
I guess.

To me, just the hecticness of that situation makes swimming and training quite
intense. Just a few strokes after entering the lane, I start keeping an eye on
my back and I start to feel anxious to get overpassed.

However, other than a competitive zero sum game would suggest, I actually don't
get sad about losing to others in the pool. Instead, being passed by others
makes me want to improve my technique and breathing. They motivate me. So
logically afterwards, I ended up thinking about the concept of competition.

In many of my previous jobs, competition has been a complete turn-off. It's
when I feel that I don't want to engage in aggression and extra effort just to
reach a goal that usually requires less engagement. In those moments, I feel
that competition is wasteful and for losers.

And in many startup self-help books, like Peter Thiel's famous "Zero to One",
that line of thinking is thoroughly confirmed. But is it universally true that
"competition is for losers"?

A nice theoretic resolution to the anecdote would be to introduce and define
the different kind of theoretic games. Through simplifiying the swimmers to a
length, speed and comparing them to the physical properties of the pool -
surely we could find an optimal strategy, e.g. one that minimizes overtaking
and maximizes the distance swum.

However, exactly that thought would require assuming that all actors
fundamentally behaved completely rational to either increase their economic
status or gain some form of homogenious utility. But specifically in the swim
lane, I'd argue that everyone's motivations are so fastly different that a
simplifying model could only poorly capture everybody's real intents. It
wouldn't produce an effective strategy.

It's because I, for example, liked today's hectic "vibe" as it allowed me to
have a more intense training. Other swimmers could have had similar intention
or their's could have been totally uncorrelated. For me, it was to swim faster
and to compare my fitness. Next time it may already be different. And why not -
there's entirely nothing at stake either.

I'll admit; closing this essay now with a logical conclusion about what I've
learned is difficult. But I'll say this: "competition is for losers" is an
unnecessary broad generalization and it's most definitely not universally true
(who would have guessed). Rather, today's experience suggests that some
competition is worth and fun engaging with.

---

published 2019-09-27 by timdaub
