# How Musicians Could Profit From Copyleft

Few people intuitively understand Copyleft. Especially in all peripheral parts
of the software development industry, people are (painfully) unaware, but more
importantly, I seldom see someone showing a deep understanding of Copyleft.

But Copyleft, despite many now disagreeing, makes the world go round. "It eats
the world," as a loaded baldheaded white man would say. So why is it that the
ideas of Copyleft and, more importantly, its sound understanding is lacking in
so many knowledge-work-based and creative industries?

In the following article, I want to outline the importance of Copyleft
licensing in the software development industry. I'll purposefully conflate the
ideas of Copyleft licensing with other, higher-level, open-source software
principles too. I'll do that intentionally to paint a decisive picture for
everyone working outside my industry, towards a better understanding of
Copyleft - e.g., in the music industry.

## Please "sample" my code!

Contrary to, e.g. musicians, software developers happily upload their
painstakingly-created code to public platforms. Consider this; software
developers are among the best-paid knowledge workers globally. In places like
Silicon Valley, they take home unheard-of paychecks and equity.

Still, if you know one, you're likely aware that on some Saturdays and Sundays,
they'll cancel your brunch dates to instead sit in front of their computer just
to fix this one bug in their open-source library.

If we were to put a nominal value on the amount of free work being pushed
online to GitHub; If we summed up all the accumulated hours of software
developers dwelling on code in their undies on the weekend - just to give it
away "for free," every business person and their assistants would be losing
their minds! It's anarchy! How can they do that?! Aren't they afraid of someone
stealing their work??

But that's where I think it is important to understand that coming from another
industry, e.g., music, how software developers think when shipping open-source
code has to be considered vastly different from, e.g., musicians.

While Kanye et al. may go complete batshit about seeing their work sampled
without prior legal agreement and moral attribution, as a software engineer
working under the principles of Copyleft, my highest goal is "developing a
sample and then promoting it such that everyone uses it."

Software, being, fortunately, a rather recently developed art, gladly had
genious contributors like Linus Torvalds, Richard Stallman, and others who made
sure that attribution (git and package managers), licensing (e.g., GPL), and
free speech are built into the free (as in libre) software production stack.

In open-source software development, developers want their code to be "sampled"
(or referenced) as broadly as possible. It furthers their brand and
credibility; it's their default as proper attribution is always given.

So it happens that when engineers write code "for free" and everyone uses it, a
rather direct incentive comes into play: they are invited to join higher-paid
or higher-status jobs. They earn more money, are more popular, and sometimes,
they even have to work less.

Open-source software developers like [mxstbr](https://mxstbr.com/), the creator
of the react boilerplate, have made a professional career out of a single
significant open source contribution. That guy wrote code that 1% of the
worldwide web now uses, and he probably never made a penny _directly_ from that
react boilerplate OSS.

## Brand-building and Copyleft are better than Copyright.

Sure, particularly business types in the software industry may now say that
with open source software, a company cannot sustain its business. They'll
enumerate countless examples where OSS hasn't worked out. Or, they'll list the
numerous instances where software is exclusively reserved under copyright laws
and generates shittons of cash.

And it's probably true: More money is directly made from exclusively
copyrighted software.

But for me, as an individual, I have particular aims for my career, those being
the freedom to explore my curiosity while still making a good salary - building
a brand and contributing to the global catalog of OSS works well.

Moreover, I know for a fact, though, that there are many others like me
profiting from their work being openly accessible. After all, the world runs on
open-source software in 2022. There's no app, no website, phone, or car that
isn't using the undies-generated "free" code. As much as you cannot escape
technology's accelerationism, for sure, you won't be able to run from having to
use open-source software.

Today, writing open-source software and building an online brand is a well-paid
and prosperous career any engineer should consider.

## OSS is speech, and speech doesn't have a price.

But developing open-source software goes far beyond just brand-building and
making money as an individual. Albeit cynically (and falsely) derided,
Stallman's Free Software Definition and its proclamation of software being
"free" as in "free speech" (and not "free" as "free of charge") is paramount to
creating a plane of freedom for all contributors.

It is here where I reference back to the article's beginning and when I said
that few truly understand the power of Copyleft. On other occurrences when it
was clear, I've tried to make a similar argument, e.g., when Facebook set out
to build the metaverse, and [I said that a stock company isn't capable of
creating a public good like the
metaverse](/2021/11/03/principles-for-the-metaverse/). Only a FOSS approach
could achieve that.

Copyleft software licenses, particularly the GNU General Public License, allow
software developers to create a work, or a [social
architecture](https://github.com/hintjens/socialarchitecture), much greater
than their individual contributions.

The GPL license allows each contributor to fully retain their Copyright while
making their work available under viral conditions. Any other user is permitted
to use the GPL-licensed software in other GPL-licensed software, while the
license specifically disallows distributing GPL-licensed code in proprietarily
distributed software.

The beauty of this construct is in viewing every single contribution of a
repository as a GPL-licensed commitment from distinct individuals. It is this
viewpoint that makes clear the mandatoriness of GPL's virality and the
incentives it creates.

A GPL contributor retains Copyright, and since their contribution can likewise
only be used within GPL-licensed, an old code repository can grow into a
convoluted monster of individual code donations.

It is this property that makes contributing to knowledge work under Copyleft so
powerful. Because similarly to how an employee might work towards furthering
their company's interest in increasing its stock prices, a well-setup GPL
project creates interest in fostering its popularity and technological
sophistication for all its contributors.

Just imagine the over-poweredness of a GPL for music. The virality effect of
sucking all musical primitive inventions into a global repertoire of sounds and
samples.

But back to software and since, e.g., GNU/linux's repository has accumulated
years of work from a maximally diverse set of agents, all licensing their work
under GPL; it is maximally difficult to capture and hence a direct threat (and
blessing) to the world's most powerful corporations like Google, Microsoft and
others.

Sure, we could ask everybody who has ever contributed to Linux if they'd be
interested in selling Linux for a bazillion dollars to Microsoft: But the point
is that reaching a sale-positive state in this
[vetocracy](https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/12/19/bullveto.html) of GPL
contributors would literally be impossible.

OSS is speech, and speech doesn't have a price. For artists, like musicians,
whose work is also often speech, their work too - should have no price - and
they should be paid like software engineers. So we should work towards making
that happen.

## Update from 2022-08-07

Vince from the AI Alignment and Rationality meetup in Berlin made me aware of
an interview of Lex Friedman with John Carmack where they end up mentioning the
same phenomenon too. [Timestamped-link to
Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/3LddnZjkpflldHXnRZ0rrw?si=8uvXpi-JQliCCawSCjQONg&utm_source=copy-link&t=7457).
Thanks for sending it to me!

---

published 2022-05-05 by timdaub
