# It's Time To Think

An overtold tale among those I'd classify as corporate libertarians is the idea
of "building the future" over participating in societal discourse on social
media. Popular proponents of this ideology, influential figureheads of the
religion of startupism, loudly take to Twitter, proclaiming that "[It's time to
build](https://a16z.com/2020/04/18/its-time-to-build/)" or "Don't argue on
Twitter. Build the future."

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Don&#39;t argue on Twitter.<br>Build the future.</p>&mdash; Balaji Srinivasan (@balajis) <a href="https://twitter.com/balajis/status/820139852041777152?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">January 14, 2017</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Though posing as neutral and freedom-loving libertarians, those same proposers
are arguing for the opening of a new digital frontier - their sacred path
towards progress and redemption in the eye of crisis. By coincidence, they also
identify any post-modern attempt at reasoning with morals as capital "W"
Wokeness and identify it as a [newly emergent
religion](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fDB1CsfUjys), quasi the remains of
now unpopularized Christian beliefs.

Though always wanting to make their listeners believe the libertarian
apolitical ideals towards not caring about other people's business, "chief
ideology officer" Andreessen asks the defining questions on a recently
published episode of the Joe Rogan podcast: "Do we want a big part of society
smoking weed constantly? Do we think that's a good thing?" meanwhile probably
underrating the audience's skills in detecting tonality and the intentions
behind his reasoning. "Wokeness," as Andreessen and Srinivasan conclude, is the
opposite of progress and productivity.

In fact, Andreessen, a manager at one of the biggest venture capital firms on
the planet, famously announced in April 2020, during a time the first COVID-19
lockdowns were implemented, that "[It's time to
build](https://a16z.com/2020/04/18/its-time-to-build/)," in a short essay
published on his venture fund's website, comically shaming the US government
for its unreadiness in light of the dramatically unfolding events, meanwhile
neglecting to reflect on his firm's practices.

Andreessen, privileged to co-lead one of the biggest tech companies in the
world: "Meta," or how I like to call it: "Facebook," rhetorically asks his
following in the "[It's time to
build](https://a16z.com/2020/04/18/its-time-to-build/)" essay during a time
most "plebs" were probably occupied with increasing or securing their physical
well-being: "where the gleaming skyscrapers and spectacular living
environments" are that we were promised?

While claiming to have "clearly" identified part of the problem as a lack of
"foresight, a failure of imagination" and the "widespread inability to
_build_." His answer is simple and, in startup terms, "actionable": "We need to
_want_ these things." In that being brilliant and bald (not bold), Andresseen
perfectly arbitrages the political vacuum the virus had suddenly created in
political America: "We need to build, and I don't care which side you're on!"

However, in hind- and not foresight, Andreessen opposes a "gleaming" mistake in
his thinking, a fallacy of great importance, by neglecting reflection on how
his contribution to the country's readiness has shaped its COVID-19 response.
He, a citizen owning a > $100M mansion in California almost for a decade, is
part of an infamous elite of venture capitalists who controls who gets to scale
a startup company and who doesn't have the guts. Slightly tangential, he also
goes on record saying that "Hitler gave eugenics a bad name," in Rogan's latest
interview.

Anyways, it is hence rather comical that while Andreessen focuses on the
shortcomings of US-American infrastructure during a pandemic, his venture fund,
over a multi-year period, has funded many vanity companies whose sole purpose
was and is commercializing some mundane aspect of first world human life.

Among the top-listed [portfolio](https://a16z.com/portfolio/) companies, his
firm a16z sports, below I've hand-selected a short list of true humanistic
world-improvers to make the argument further that, indeed, Marc, "it's time to
build **something useful**":

- Pinterest: A company that pioneered hijacking Google Search results for
  growth, probably decreasing global productivity from internet searches by a
  few percentage points.
- Groupon: Commercializing digital shopping vouchers for whatever reason. No
  idea who uses this crap or what it's good for.
- Robinhood: Wall-street level of corporate greed and white-collar corruption
  (as the GME incident showed) but with a slightly better user interface than
  your average-greedy broker.
- Zynga: literally all they did is Farmville wtf
- Roblox: a video game
- Dollar Shave Club: An online subscription model for razors, where they don't
  sell better razors; it's just a different way of pricing them): you pay a
  monthly subscription.
- Imgur: An online image hosting provider to share nudes on Reddit.
- Instagram: Same, but with fewer nudes, a newsfeed but with many detrimental
  effects on society, as Francis Haugen has made the case.

So in a way, it isn't truly surprising when Andreessen asks us, "where the
gleaming skyscrapers" are, as it's probably less to be understood as a question
directed to his audience and more as an exercise of meditation or
inward-looking. Because it's true: There are no gleaming skyscrapers that a16z
has managed to build. And it also hasn't helped to prepare their country for a
more appropriate pandemic response. Instead, what it achieved is to send you a
package of razors monthlyâ€”a shave club.

Having been gifted the ultimate power of curating innovation by leading the
world's top venture capitalist firm of the planet's biggest economy in the
middle of an unprecedented pandemic, in a sense, Andreessen has come to his
senses. Unconsciously he now understands: The venture capital industry truly
isn't structurally capable of funding a future full of utility.

And let me be clear in my messages and intentions when I say that I
wholeheartedly agree with Andreessen's call "to build," however, I think that
the guy is blinded by all the billions of dollars of stake that he has
corporations around the world - such that an exclamation as "[It's time to
build](https://a16z.com/2020/04/18/its-time-to-build/)," is less the outcome of
"staying with the trouble" and much more a justification to preserve his
position of power.

Although I'm not even an American, let me tell you that shaming US politics in
their darkest hour and in a call "to build" isn't a heroic act of patriotism -
in fact, it is the opposite of American exceptionalism and "not asking what
your country can do for you, but what can you do for your country."

At the same time, with Andreessen still being invited as a guest on Joe Rogan's
by letting him make a case for Wokeism being harmful to society's progress,
there is also a fallacy in the tech scene's thinking about
[consequentialism](https://www.learnliberty.org/blog/getting-good-results-vs-doing-the-right-thing/).

It's suggested that Wokeism is this political or religious artifact, this
fundamental attack vector in human social interaction and that ultimately, as
Srinivasan's put it, the ignoring of most or all moral, societal discourse is
ultimately the "scared path to salvation" and to "building the future."

Those that "believe" in the effectiveness of this principle are now under
public scrutiny for implementing a military-like "For Wokeness issues: Don't
ask, don't tell" doctrine in now-many publicly listed companies with the idea
seeming to be that it would increase focus and productivity. But towards what
goal? Higher click-through rates?

And while I, too, reject the notion of too direct and applied consequentialism
when solving technical problems, I also want to point at the importance of what
seems to be entirely neglected in the commercial field of developing software:
Aesthetics.

This thought, and eventually that entire essay you've read so far, came to my
mind when I watched a "review" of a "gleamingly-build" but totally misplaced
train station in the middle of a loud highway intersection in Los Angeles. And
I don't even want to expand on the point much as it seems too obvious. Namely
that, ignorance and the lack of accountability towards any form of
consequentialism can lead to atrocious outcomes like this train station
reviewed below:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/1vrQHMhZ3k4" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

It perfectly symbolizes the issue I take with Andreessen and other corporate
"libertarians" undifferentiated calls "to build and ignore the noise": Yes,
it's fine to build. But maybe don't "move fast and break things" and don't
build or fund useless commercialized shit like Pinterest, Farmville, Groupon,
or Instagram - as it leads to nothing in a global health crisis like that
COVID-19 triggered.

More positively put: "Yeah, as always, it's time to build, but the design
principles, the discussions, the participation, the conceptualization,
communication, the aesthetics, the humans, and outcomes of the process" matter
more than the "gleam" and the "potency" that comes from "being able to build
gleaming skyscrapers."

---

published 2022-07-27 by timdaub
