# NFTs are coming for Instagram and other social media platforms

I'll admit it; I did some good old [shoulder
surfing](<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shoulder_surfing_(computer_security)&oldid=1023421734>)
on my flight back to Berlin the other day. The next bit is kinda spicy, but
I'll anyways tell you about it: On the flight, there was this guy in a pink
hoodie sitting one seat in front and to the right of me. He held his phone at a
height where it leveled with his eyes, and so sitting in a middle seat myself -
I didn't even have much of a choice other than
[viddying](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Appendix:A_Clockwork_Orange#V) his
Instagram browsing habits.

It was when we were approaching Berlin's new airport "BER," and so here we
were, all tucked into our seats - seatbelts fastened and this one douche
checking his Instagram during our approach to the airport. Though this is very
tangential to the story, he had disabled Airplane Mode on his phone early to
use his mobile data inflight - we were still hundreds of meters in the air. So
while the pilots were busy having the bird touch Berlin soil gently, my guy in
front started checking out his Insta.

And frankly, nothing out of the ordinary happened on that screen - there were
the obligatory pictures of hot girls in bikinis. Some humble shots of
[bugatties](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Appendix:A_Clockwork_Orange#B) on
yachts and a general "dolce vita" vibe with [golden
hour](<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Golden_hour_(photography)&oldid=1033749526>)
filters left and right. But in between, there were the targeted ads. And to my
surprise, these were mega-effective. So effective that upon our plane reaching
the airport's gate - the guy had put several items into his "Ralph Lauren"
shopping cart.

Well, Hannes - if you're reading this - I wish you all the best fun wearing
that sick blue polo shirt at your next yachty party (we were on a Ryanair
flight).

And though, I found this experience rather striking - it wasn't my intention
specifically to expose that guy's Instagram browsing habits in this post.
Rather, I wanted to draw a picture of contemporary Instagram usage in 2021 and
then compare it to what is happening with cryptocurrencies these days, lol.

The connection leading to this story originates from a talk show I recently
watched, featuring Hito Steyerl, Joseph Vogel and Ville Haimala. It's the most
recent episode of [Studio Bonn](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btQRji5fU_8) on
"Crypto-Capitalism".

I won't spoiler any of the content here except for saying that Ville, being a
member of the band Amnesia Scanner, made a statement about comparing NFTs to
Instagram posts. Specifically, he remarked that their data structure allows
NFTs to be platform-independent social media. So whereas all posts on Instagram
are constantly at the mercy of its arbitrary moderation policy and the assumed
continuity of the service's existence - an NFT transcends these weak points by
storing the media "off-platform" and by making its access and meta data
interoperable.

That comparison struck me as profound. It did so as I had been working for
years on an intellectual property licensing framework called [COALA
IP](https://www.coalaip.org/) to allow digitizing Copyright claims and
licensing deals on blockchains. I'll admit that throughout my journey within
[ascribe.io](https://ascribe.io), working with smaller projects later on and
even trying to build an
[ERC-721](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/standards/tokens/erc-721/)
[wallet](https://github.com/TimDaub/ERC721-wallet) myself - I had to face many
frustrating blockers with regards to Ethereum's way of implementing NFTs.

And hence, just before the big NFT craze in 2021, in 2020, I stopped working on
it. To me, that standard, the ERC-721, didn't seem useful for what I was trying
to achieve. And indeed, I ended up doubling down on that believe by [publicly
remarking that an NFT's provenance won't guarantee the authenticity many think
it
does](https://timdaub.github.io/2021/04/22/nft-sleepminting-beeple-provenance/).

Today, by writing this post, I feel more confirmed by contemplating Ville's
statement of comparing the NFT standard to an interoperable Instagram post.
Indeed, it's a perfect fit.

Yes, you may attribute value to an NFT by selling it on a marketplace. Yes,
that value may be astronomical and irrational today. And indeed, the properties
of atoms is different than the one of bits. But if you misjudge the relevance
of these properties - I think you may miss one particularly important
observation.

![Copying the picture of "The Scream" many times on my computer (2015)](/assets/images/stealingthescream.gif)

The data structure of an NFT is strikingly similar to that of an Instagram,
Facebook, or Twitter post. It's a link to a media element, e.g., an image or a
video and a description - all that meta data is then related to a particular
identity, your Ethereum address, or ENS name.

Yes, there's no distinct feed that lets you like or retweet an NFT yet. Today,
NFTs don't "look and feel" instagramish. There's also a lack of targeted ads
and probably hence also a void of golden hour Luis Vuitton yacht photos. But
that's because the current NFT infrastructure, unlike Instagram's, doesn't
reward creators for being on yachts wearing expensive clothes. It's not about
fake it till you make it - the idea of NFTs is to reward credibility and
provenance.

So indeed, I'd conclude for today that the NFT data structure is the perfect
technical and conceptual foundation for building a free Instagram, Facebook, or
Twitter.

It does so by making social media posts platform-independent and abstracting
the ownership and accessibility layer away from the platforms and into the
hands of creators and fans.

So don't worry - NFTs are NOT coming to "revolutionize the art market" -
funnily enough, they're coming with full force to disrupt the attention
monopoly of Facebook, Twitter, and other social media platforms. And though
that was something I never anticipated or deliberately worked towards in my
work - I can't wait for that to happen.

---

published 2021-07-21 by timdaub
