# Dissenting through the Mainstream

Viewing social networks as gigantic social information dissemination and
synchronization machines makes understanding today's zeitgeist palpable. The
networks economically seek engagement and present users with many current
takes. Debating culture, consensus-seeking, and decision-making is
ever-accelerating in all fields of society. Easily sharable opinion packages
sway whole nations, and while minority opinion-holders call for "freedom" and
the virtue of "thinking for yourself," the network's argument chest grows
through the compatibility and universal comprehensibility of their contributors
arguments. Not the originality of the thought counts: Rather, it is the moral
integrity within the political ideology. But, pre-bundled opinion dissemination
poses dangerous consequences for the population: Commercializing over
functionalizing maximally optimizes for beautifying packaging and not
increasing utility. The Populus mandates social media to represent the global
common denominator, and a virality coefficient measured by a click-through rate
indicates the content's success: Not its general utility to the consuming.
The dissemination logic of content on the internet for maximum attention is a
binary tournament of competition: The thumbnail, title, and description of
content A and B compete for side by side. Through continuous hierarchical
competition, a never-ending AB engagement test conducts today's champion in
this battle royal. Thus, although we are observing social networks to create
dissent and subversion on the long tail of their attention markets, the
dominant players are those who create the most agreeable, comprehendible, and
composable opinion packages in due time for consumption - minding the appetite.
Dissenting has become pathological: Psychotic, conspirational, crazy.
Subversion is anti-social, un-virtuous, or evil. The mainstream is good, and it
is all-encompassing. It can express dissent and subversion: It provides a
glossy (non-commercial looking) surface; a $9.99 starter pack: A new season's
item pass for overthrowing the latest tyranny.

But, real dissent, by definition, cannot exist within the mainstream. Its
existence is created through distinction and seclusion. It is maintained
through careful curation, debate, selective consumption, and lifestyle. It has
to be created not only through consumption but through play and sacrifice.
Today's enemy of dissent is exposure to the agreeable and the compromise.
Dissent is conflict, not its aversion: Surface-ly and not within the
underground anymore. It does not look dark, pointy, hidden, colorful, natural,
or secluded anymore. And it rejects permanent or phenotypical identity and
plays on all stages - under masks, dresses, ornaments, and sometimes naked and
in plain sight. Its function is the production of true epistemic intelligence
through trust in the human mind's error-correcting capability. It understands
influence and power to be invisible and undiscovered. Its strength emerges from
adaptability, continuous reproduction, and resilience, from asymmetry,
asynchronicity, and solitude.

Once observed through all its facets, dissent and subversion form the base of
all bias. Its utility is rationalization and quantification: Its effect is the
mainstream's emergence.
