# Against Toxic Optimism

Optimism describes a social behavior whereby individuals or groups tend to
favor evaluating a subject's positive sides rather than seeking to balance
their view by also considering negatives.

We deem optimism as toxic when its application or incidence occurs excessively
or as a form of denial of a skewed perception of reality.

## The Itch of Positivity

Although [I'd prefer not
to](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bartleby,_the_Scrivener), I want to start
this essay with a personal anecdote, namely when I first helped co-create a
platform for upvoting submissions in university. For a portal to collect and
discuss privacy patterns, as a frontend developer, I helped set up
[privacypatterns.eu](https://privacypatterns.eu) whose supposed goal was to
bubble up the best patterns for improved privacy.

Rather quickly, a discussion ensued around the concepts of upvoting and
downvoting patterns with my colleagues responsible for maintaining the
database.

Already seven years ago, surprisingly, we were all intimately familiar with
sites like Facebook and Reddit that served as role models for our site. We knew
that FB's "Like" acted as an upvote-only function, whereas Reddit allowed users
to express nominal negativity too.

But apart from getting lost in thought, I still remember not involving myself
much in the conversation as I found it to be over my head. And I can't say
for sure if the following seven years of software engineering make it any
easier thinking about this topic today.

I have, however, managed to curate a persevering itch telling me that exclusive
positivity on social media platforms must lead to detrimental outcomes. And
recently, I've felt becoming a victim of toxic positivity increasingly. With
this post, I now want to detail the charms of that itch.

## The Curse of Positivity

Interestingly, they say that to be successful on social media; One has to
present their most authentic self. And logically, this statement then mandates
asking if human billboard Gary Vaynerchuk was indeed born with an authentic but
highly _commercial_ personality or if his behavior is merely a professional
shtick to sell more NFTs.

Similarly, after wanting to understand if people really like Logan Paul and
KSI's new "PRIME" soft drink, naively I youtube'd "prime review" only to come
across a [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xk2UDs8wXKI) of "No Life
Shaq," a dude that "got big off purely big-upping everyone." His surprising
verdict: It tastes A M A Z I N G.

![](/assets/images/big-upping.png)

And while I may now fall into the category of "hating ass clowns," I have to
say that I would have wished to click on a more critical review of the
beverage.

See, I don't feel like the collective soyfacing of Tesla is necessarily a bad
thing for society, considering that it may have contributed to awakening the
Swabian automobile giants to make more fuel-efficient cars. Similarly, I
believe that the CO2 criticism of cryptocurrencies will continue to have a
positive effect on the field.

Although, I feel there's now a class of positivity, stirred up by disjoint
interest, which outcomes I'd mostly describe as toxic.

But the narrative of favoring optimistic quantitative engagement on social
media platforms is still controversially discussed way beyond my little
website.

Most prominently, with Youtube recently removing the dislike count from videos
to reduce bullying on the platform. Seemingly challenged to make a rational
argument, the dislike button's proponents now claim that they cannot
differentiate good from bad tutorial videos.

## Getting Ratioed

Though, what that argument misses is a conversation about getting
[ratioed](https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=ratioed) and its
detrimental effects on the creator's soul. And as someone that has had [32.1k
impressions](https://plausible.io/timdaub.github.io?period=12mo) from Hacker
News while writing a column about cryptocurrencies and web3, I, for one, can
confidently claim to be a convincing witness of "getting ratioed."

The other day, I had the stupid idea of reviving one of my most popular posts
called "web3 is a stupid idea" by re-submitting it to /r/ethereum. And while
the post had some genuine negativity around Ethereum's vision of creating a
web3 and not an internet2, I'd argue that the post's message ends up being a
friendly riff on Ethereum's mainstream vision.

Although I knew the post had previously done extraordinarily well on the
web3-critical Hacker News, I wasn't ready for Reddit's rude reaction.

Just seconds after posting, I was being called a "cranky monkey" just "bitching
about web3." While I tried to defuse the situation with humor, the broader
community agreed with the premature headline reader by upvoting their rude
comment.

And so, after just a few hours, and in a phase of my self-confidence
diminishing, I deleted the post and arranged with myself to further limit my
involvement with the /r/ethereum community. Screw them.

## Negativity Through Toxic Positivity

Now, understandably one may say that my experience had little to do with
witnessing "toxic positivity" as most of the above-mentioned reactions stemmed
from negativity. But I'd, hereon, like to argue that I believe their source is
excessive optimism towards the project and that it stems from short-term
monetary interest.

In the case of Reddit communities or Hacker News, this way of banishing members
of the potential out-group allows the group's delusion to survive. "[Groups
Never Admit Failure](https://nav.al/failure)," and indeed, if we'd think about
groups huddling around excessive negativity, then we'd notice a similar effect.

## Critical Crypto Currencies

With the cryptocurrency market almost having morphed into a bear recently, it
has become a source of relaxation for me.

I've found the excessive hyping and nonsense noise in the last year difficult
to deal with. I'm not mad that we've received more attention than usual. But I
think my spot of comfort is in a market that isn't entirely irrational and
driven by boom and bust. Maybe I like me some good old crypto winters.

Or, and that I'd prefer, the crypto market and its moonbois just grow up and
learn to deal with critique professionally.

As a long-term believer of the space's visions, I'd argue that only highly
critical contact with the subject matter will lead to excellent results over
the long term. So I'd be happy to see less hilarity and more humbleness.

---

## Further reading

- [All posts](/#writing)
- 2021-02-22: [Ethereum isn't fun anymore](/2021/02/22/ethereum-isnt-fun-anymore/)
- 2021-12-15: [Are Token Holders Slaying Moloch?](/2021/12/15/token-holders-arent-slaying-moloch/)
- 2020-09-08: [web3 is a stupid idea (ðŸ”Š)](/2020/09/08/web3/)
