# On-chain, The Emperor Wears No Clothes

<img src="/assets/images/emperor.jpg">

I'll cut right to the chase: I believe a big reason why many people in this
world suffer is because some other people can afford to decide irrationally.

In "Was ist Autorit√§t?" (en.: "What is authority?") Bochenski, the author,
divides authority into two distinct categories. Authority, he claims, is a
relationship between e.g. two parties and a domain, where one party
acknowledges the authority of another over the domain.

However, Bechenski makes a remarkable categorization of authorities within the
book. He generally divides authority into _epistemic_ and _deontic_ and
specifies that:

- an _epistemic_ authority (= "relating to knowledge") says it "_how it is_";
  whereas
- a _deontic_ authority (= "relating to duty and obligation) says it "_how it
  should be_".

I find these categories remarkable as they also help to get a clearer picture
when, for example, working with software. I'd go even further and say that many
conflicts in developing software stem from denying or being unaware of this
power dynamic.

If, for example, you browse blog posts on Hacker News, then you'll often come
across the type of developer that hates meetings and their manager. The
brisance in the relationship to their manager, I've come to observe, often
stems from failing to differentiate between _epistemic_ and _deontic_
authority.

It's because generally, the developer bases their arguments on "_how things
are_", whereas the manager is commissioned to make things "_how they should
be_". Put more simply, the developer is an epistemic authority to the manager,
but the manager is a deontic authority to the developer.

And while you might think that, hence, there shouldn't be a problem as surely
things between devs and managers will balance out over time, acknowledging the
anecdotal reality is that I've never read an angry manager's blog.

So I'd argue that the reason I've never seen a manager's mad blog is that they,
being the deontic authority, always get their way by being also in control of
the project's funds and hence the dev. So even though things "_are_", they're
made as they "_should_".

## On-chain, the Emperor wears no Clothes

Now, to deliver on this article's headline, which reads why "on-chain, the
emperor wears no clothes," I think it's of vital importance to understand the
difference in the types of authorities. It's because in the colorful world of
ERC20s, who controls the token, controls the money and hence puts themselves
into the deontic authority position towards others.

Suddenly, things can't be done in a rational way anymore: The "_how it is_"
stops being acknowledged. The "_how it should be_" becomes more relevant. And
that's where, in my opinion, the suffering for epistemic authorities starts.

## Authorative Development

It is my conviction any type of software we use today is based on epistemology
and not deontology. It's because deontology can't inform epistemology.

It may be concluded that indeed the world is better should 2 + 1 = 4, but
deontology doesn't carry the same power as reason and epistemology. Deontology
can only be accomplished through force and continuous preaching.

Epistemology, on the other hand, appears in humans beings as a fundamental
feeling. In a way, it could be seen as the most powerful appliance of empathy.

It's because if we explain math to someone and succeed in making them
understand, then through this act of understanding, we transferred knowledge.
We haven't had to use force. We didn't need to preach. The person comprehended
the knowledge through the feeling of discovery. That person, taught
epistemically, can now go out in the world and start teaching others.

With deontic reasoning, on the other hand, we can't gain this level of
sustainability. To enforce the "_should_", we'll have to stay in control and
exercise power. If our student was to escape and roam the world, they may now
run the risk of being exposed to knowledge. Then what?

Well eventually, I'd argue, that knowledge and "_what is_" would start
overwriting the forcefully fed "_should_". One day, all preachings would be
gone and worst of all, our student wouldn't be able to transfer any of the
"_should_". At worst, they'd know less "_what is_" and start therefore start
immitating their infamous teacher.

So you ask why I claim that "on-chain, the emperor wear no clothes?" I tell
you, it's because his emperor's tailors were so blinded by the shiny value of
their ERC20 tokens, they stopped seing "_what is_" and only did what they
ought.

---

published 2021-10-21 by timdaub
