# How did I become a productive writer?

A question I've been getting asked a lot is: "Have you always written that
much? How do you approach writing? How do you get into the mode?" Usually, when
I get this question, I answer it straight away with a direct message; But I
figured: Why not make this question the content of a post?

### i.

I want to start with the most fundamental principle of becoming a productive
writer: publishing. It's probably the only true secret behind my myriad
articles to date: Daring to seek an achievable scope and hitting the submit
button, exposing my thoughts to the world and feeling vulnerable.
Now, can you be a successful writer without ever publishing? Absolutely: Franz
Kafka, maybe the greatest author of all time, seldomly published his work, and
much of it was actually released posthumously by a close friend of his.

However, from my point of view: you'll have to dare publish your thoughts
somehow. It's because you'll only do the hard work of committing to scope when
you truly post and hence feel a little embarrassed.

Look: The hard part of writing isn't stringing words together or coming up with
a good-sounding paragraph or two. Like in other creative mediums, writing is
about better understanding yourself, how you can work with language and how
much work you can handle without going crazy.

See, if I were suddenly gifted the entire world's time to focus on writing, I'd
totally want to dostoyevsky myself into a new universe. I'd start grand - epic
with no end in sight. But from my experience as a blogger, I also know that
this is as unrealistic as it is foolish. I'd go crazy because if you practice
the craft, you know how unhappy one can be with a formerly written paragraph
read with fresh eyes. Editing cannot go on forever.

So writing, as I'd like to teach it in this post: It's achievable through
regular publishing, and it's why this website's called "Proof in Progress," as
I've accepted my incapability of ever publishing anything definitive or
comprehensive. "Proof in Progress" that's a website filled with articles mostly
written in one sitting, with little time spent editing - it shows, but that's
OK because I'm productive.

### ii.

The second principle of writing I'd like to point out is its potency: Its power
to transfer thought and ideas. It's permanence. Writing; that's daring to
expose some intrinsic state of your brain into the atoms of the universe for
everyone to observe.

It's a ridiculous thing to communicate but speaking your mind; telling others
how you see the world is so fundamental to our social existence: you'll doubt
its effects at first.

One such inspiring encounter I had roughly a year ago when starting to work
with Hito Steyerl, a renowned essayist and filmmaker. Working as the software
engineer on one of her projects, as with other customers, we had regular calls
to sync up on our work's status. But there was an additional, and what people
now call a "parasocial" relationship that I curiously developed through working
with her.

It started with Youtube recommending me her previous talks on other topics, and
it is probably the closest I've come to an actual "brain dump" - ingesting many
of her ideas and her viewpoint without ever having a bilateral conversation
with her.

While this is somewhat awkward to admit, and maybe it's also not an exactly
attractive proposition for becoming a productive writer - having been working
at the forefront of technology, feeling lonely about the challenges I face is a
defacto existential threat to my career and well-being. Either I can make
myself understood clearly, or there's a good chance others think I'm just
crazy. Hence, once the words are out and you've managed to express yourself -
not only is there power in the permanent availability of your prior argument;
but you may also feel more at peace with the world.

For once, because you can always reference back to your text, but secondly,
because there's a fair chance your friends and colleagues are actually reading
what you're saying and so they won't confront you on past arguments anymore.

### iii.

But you won't become a renowned writer overnight, and for me, there are always
idols to look up to: Today, it's those that can write much more verbosely and
those that have arguably more patience and trust in themselves to commit to
more. In fact, it's probably foolish to suggest that I've become a "productive
writer" and that this article can teach you to reach that final form. But
looking at the texts I published, the feedback I got, and the self-confidence I
observed, I can safely say that I've improved and that I've found a process
that puts me on an interesting trajectory.

Writing, as running, coding, working, and self-care: It's a habit that needs to
be established through frequent practice. I identify as a writer because I
purposefully write and because I've made it a craft of personal
self-improvement. I don't necessarily write for you, the audience. I couldn't
because, sorry, not sorry; you can't make me happy enough. When you disagree
with me, when you call me a fool, or you poke holes into my theories - I feel
terrible, and I certainly wouldn't want to serve you more. So I fundamentally
don't write for others: I write for myself and because I like committing to the
process and the feelings it invokes. That's why I've committed to the process
of writing.

### iv.

And that's it for today: It's these three criteria that can make you a
productive writer: (1) To publish, (2) Realizing the power that lies in
writing, and (3) understanding why you're committing yourself to this process.

Certainly, in case you consider yourself a writer too, you may feel like these
points don't represent your approach: And that's fine. I'm not here to describe
the ideal writer or a definitive approach; rather, with this text, I've tried
summarizing the principles that lead me to publish frequently as I trust in the
reader's capability of transferring this knowledge onto their life,
circumstances, and background.

So dear reader and potential future writer: I look forward to reading what
you'll have to say!
