# How I made cycling fun again

With this post, I want to document how I made cycling fun for myself again.

The context is that, maybe sometime in 2018-2019, I (falsely) started to
believe that cycling would be a great option for transportation in the inner
city. I started to become an urban mobility enthusiast. I believed that we
could remodel cities in ways where transportation could become less pollutive,
quicker and safer. I'd think that bikes were one of the core ways to achieve
this in my home Berlin Germany.

I'd get on my bike with a great sense of entitlement for wanting to feel
comfortable, safe and respected by all the other traffic participants. 

I'd watch the videos from famous urban mobility influencers like not-just-bikes
or Adam Something. 

When motorists would cut me off in traffic, my idealism and anger would kick in
for how selfish they are.

I'd often get off my bike feeling exhausted, stressed and actually sick to
my stomach. Not even necessarily for my own failure to regulate my emotions,
but also because there'd be genuinely so many close calls during my rides that
my sense of safety would feel betrayed.

But after many years of trying to invoke the change I wanted to see, I must now
admit that these ideas and this anger were probably largely pointless.

Instead, I now wish I would have given up on my lofty expectations to change
society to the better sooner. And I wish I would have designed cycling as
primarily a sport for me ealier. I now realize that all I really wanted out of
cycling is a good and relaxing cardio workout in nature. To my shock, I
recently found out that I have all the required components for this right in
front of my door step. 

After having given up on cycling for maybe two years entirely, through watching
racing bike cycling videos on social media, this somehow reignited my love for
riding again and so more or less spontaneously, and as a means to broaden my
cardio vascular activities, I just decided to buy a Canyon Griyl AL 7 gravel
bike with the following specific intentions:

## 1. Use the bike exclusively for sport, not for transportation.

I now believe that using bikes for transportations is a fool's errand. 

In Germany, sharing the road with cars is like playing Russian Roulette. There
are so many idiots driving around, quite a few suffering delusions and
intrusive roadrage. 

I have found that it is neither worth the upside of riding, nor the anger to
even try to use a bike to get around. I think it is unnecessarily dangerous,
stressful, unhealthy and pointless. Much better and decently cheap alternatives
like shared cars or public transport exist.

However, using a bike during workouts for sport feels great. I get to use a
muscle group that isn't necessarily hit by my other activities and riding is just
so much fun!

## 2. Do only short and under an hour workouts.

I'm not sure why but I was, for many years, under the impression that bike
tours up to 3 or 5 hours would be a fine work out routine.

However, considering my other workouts, in retrospect, doing 3-5 hour workouts
are huge outliers in terms of duration. I'd always come back entirely drained,
exhausted and frustrated. 

Starting to treat bikes rides with the same duration-discipline I have with
swimming resistance training and running, I have noticed how much more
enjoyable the activity becomes. I now just ride 15 minutes in one direction
and then turn around.


## 3. Avoid, at all costs, sharing cycling routes with motorists.

Motorists are a huge risk factor when wanting to ride bikes. Riding bikes has
become a politicized issue among some motorists which feel marginalized by
pro-bike politics.

Having experienced many close calls where motorists also intentionally tried to
put me into dangerous situations, I have now made it a non-negotiable principle
to strictly minimize the time I spend sharing my route with motorists.

Interesting, I have manages to cut my road.sharing down to maybe 30 seconds,
for which I feel privilged.

## 4. Buy good equipment that aid the comfort of the ride.

I don't know why but for too long I didn't own special cycling pants. Recently,
I have bough a cheap pair from Decathlon and they have changed my life.


## Why write this?

I wanted to write this down because I feel like it is a major psychological
advancement/adaption I went through over, funnily, a decade. I want to document
this because I feel like I have managed to erradicate and turn-positive a
source of stress and frustration I felt was a political issue priorly.

While maybe small and not broadly applicable, I hope that readers of this blog
may find this either applicable in other aspects of their life, or also for
cycling.

Maybe one day truely safe Amsterdam-style cycling in the city will be possible.
I'd love if it would be. But I'm also just really happy to not having to be a
part of the annoying and exhausting politics to get there. 

I love cycling, being in nature, enjoying the feeling of a workout. The sun on
my body, the excitement of making a turn or overtaking someone. Thinking about
politics just makes me feel awful.

Do more of what you love.

---

published 2025-09-14 by timdaub
