# My Investment Thesis For The Post-2021 Bull Market

With the latest bull run in crypto having come to an end, I feel like it is now
a good time to reflect on my past investment thesis and how I feel it needs to
be adjusted. So let's jump right in.

## My Previous Thesis: DAOs And The Future Of Work

After quitting my full time employment at BigchainDB (which required physical
presence) at the end of 2018, I tried out freelancing and remote work - but
eventually met some LeapDAO contributors who worked in quite radical ways.

It was 2019, but they had already adopted DAI and were managing the
organization's treasury through a set up of Gnosis multi signatures and
Holacracy. It was around that time, being exposed to stable coins, getting
income through bounties and long Holacracy meetings that I formed my first
investment thesis for curating a specific portfolio of crypto currencies.

Having the freedom to work on whatever I wanted within the DAO for however long
I wanted felt really interesting to me. Particularily, after reading so much on
the benefits of remote work during my earlier office job.

So I know, it's not ideal to re-define an existing hypothesis in hindsight for
you as the reader. But I think it'll be an important contrast as to make us
realize how my thinking changed, when I later lay out my adjusted thesis.

So in 2019, the following was roughly my model for crypto:

- LeapDAO had created an open bounty market through standardized GitHub issues
  with labeled complexity in t-shirt sizes (S, M, L). The bigger the shirt, the
  more dollars upon completion. In the beginning, this worked really well
  within the organization: it fostered international cooperation, it made work
  quite competitive and most importantly drove down the cost for technical work
  significantly.
- Additionally, LeapDAO didn't have any hiring policy (there were no salaries
  either). Instead, anyone who joined the Slack could just start working. To me
  this was crazy at first, but I liked it and started on-boarding friends too.
  I believed this would enable the organization to source talent way more
  efficiently and competitively.
- LeapDAO's Holacracy, paired with an interesting set up of hierarchically
  organized Gnosis multi signature wallets worked surprisingly well as a mode
  for governance.
- Participating in 6 months of governance, while it produced lots of fatique, I
  concluded that this was a widely applicable framework for running
  internet-native organizations effectively.
- The additional subcircles, used for self-managed budgeting of an
  organization' departments, allowed DAO members to split off and become
  risk-seeking entrepreneurs themselves. It seemed like a great way of scaling
  work and my idea was that future organizations would use such a top-down
  model for reporting and budget controlling.
- Apart from LeapDAO specific things, at the time, I became euphoric about
  remote work functioning much better than expected and about the freedoms it
  offered (mind you that was pre-COVID). I thought that many of my colleagues
  would actually favor working in the way I now worked.
- Another emergent phenomen was DAI. It had just been launched and was
  gathering support. Having a USD stable coin was truly a game changer for
  accounting and storing value. Especially with LeapDAO, not having to risk
  one's income was a great enabler.
- Finally, around that time I also started toying around with Compound and
  Uniswap. By helping Austin Griffith with the Burner Wallet, I worked on code
  that touched the Uniswap smart contract API: and its usability surprised me.
  Additionally, sites like bity offered crypto off-ramping for limited amounts
  without KYC and so those circumstances made me believe that crypto's rate of
  adoption was accelerating.

With these concepts in mind, for a long period of time, I then selected my
portfolio's assets. I think I stopped thoroughly applying the thesis some time
in the bull market, and so it is urgently necessary to re-formulate and update
my thinking on what to pay attention now in the crypto market.

## My Investment Observations for 2022 and Beyond

### As A non-Thielian Accelerationist, I'm Bored

What I think shocked me the most about the surrounding allegations of SBF and
FTX is that it sadly confirms a hypothesis that many people promoted on social
media: Namely that crypto's inter-pandemic bull market mania is just ugly.

Already judging the memes popularized during crypto's ATH, "gems" like WAGMI
and GM, felt too chad-like and failed to embody the space's original spirit.

Whereas other bull runs have had clear technical innvations behind them: It
felt like this one was a mixture of the space discovering renevue with DeFi,
but it also got me thinking that the truly mind-bending ideas have now been
tucked away in a backlog drawers because who still wants to spent time
experimenting when dollars can be made, right?

Crypto, when I got interested: It was so fringe and almost conspiracy-theory
like that it lacked the masses' appeal - in fact, with my non-techy friends it
always made me buffed (or cursed) in an aura of edginess and so many of them
never took it or me serious. Even today, Bitcoin is to currency what globules
is to medicine: Nobody really knows of the actual effects and it is mostly
discounted as esoteric.

But what had always been appealing to me was its quality to have extremely
variability in its potential: Boom or bust, nobody could really tell - but to
make an impactful change in the world, back then, I thought this would be it.

So I think that's also how accelerationism works fundamentally: An unforgiving
strive towards optimization and innovation. To make, break and hack things for
the sake of solving problems. Not to implement a grand vision - something set
out to do by a genius inventor: But being radically neutral towards
antroposophical values and meanwhile being extremely biased towards market
signals.

But this approach, at least at the current fork in the road, to me it almost
seems like a moment of failure. Because - if all that's left when pulling the
curtain is SBF's face, WAGMI memes and shitty react.js websites that immitate
tradFi mechanisms, then what the fuck are we doing? And where else is my
attention more impactful?

So if there's anything I want to say with this thesis: Then it's that I'm
convinced by the idea looking beyond just the creative potential of software.

Two years of pandemic have taught me that while the desk, computer and the
network is the most powerful workbench ever created, real acceleration is only
achieved in additional physical presence and in moments that make themselves
felt in the gut and through anxiety. And at least for the COVID period, if
anything, digital just helped coping with aversion, it helped with implementing
aversion - a phenomenon I want to stay on top of.

### "Drop the 'Air', it's cleaner"

But let's go through this in sequential order: Web2 then three.

Famously, Mark Zuckerberg now goes on interviews telling people about the
Metaverse comedy club they invented and how it benefits shy people with social
anxiety to still live out their dreams of telling jokes in front of an
audience. But that to me sounds like the classic aversion thesis from above
that I want to fundamentally bet against.

While not a comedian myself, I still know that entering the arena vulnerably is
a carefully curated skill that takes guts to train. And while performing in
the metaverse may be a reasonable first step - the rewarding feeling of
self-expression psychologically doesn't arise from a low risk show in the
metaverse. Gratitude arises from commitment and persistence. To the felt
gratitude of speaking in front of people: the Internet isn't a replacement,
it's potentially a safer alternative though.

But I think this points towards that more interesting trend of
aversion-software: Building a personal metaverse to forego feeling these
vulnerable emotions of connectedness on a phyiscal stage. Leaving the
permanently present exit opportunity open through performing in Mark
Zuckerberg's metaverse comedy club. Potentially, with a totally anonymous
account.

In fact, many web2 solutions are now providing almost-too-good-to-be-true
offerings that anchor us into fasely ideals: Meta wants us to believe that we
can be real comedians. AirBnB, that we're staying at a friend's place. But they
sadly never really deliver on their marketing.

Dating apps successfully deceive us into thinking that an entire "city's supply
side" is within reach of our finger tips. Swiping through the offer feels
powerful: That any boy or girl of our dreams, independent of our attractivity
or theirs in just one decision away. That they're within reach.

But I think, even gender-independently, in 2022, we all know how little these
apps deliver on their promises. The deception is not just in over focusing on
what works well multi-modally (pretty images and videos, high contrast, usage
of strong language).

When we arrive at an AirBnB or a date. At a LonelyPlanet location, then we
recognize the skilfulness with which the online offer had been drafted with. We
find that visual attraction doesn't translate into the actual rooms of the
AirBnB. We find that we're not connecting with our date or that this
supposedly "lonely" planet is filled with other tourists.

YCombinator's founder Paul Graham and AirBnB's founders state on many occasions
that AirBnB is like temporarily moving in with friends. The idea being that
you're on the look-out for a holiday domicile or a place to lessen your
business trip's loneliness. In talks, they often mention the following:

> When we invested in AirBnB, we asked ourselves: Why would anyone want to rent
> their flat out to strangers?

And indeed, the modern AirBnB experience now address this question.

While I have really stayed in a young New Yorker's actual flat in 2015, that
has been the only one of those anchoring experiences throughout many other
AirBnB stays, with their contemporary accomodation being synonymous to the
terms included in its name: Unpersonal, professional and clearly niched-in "Bed
and Breakfast," a validated vertical in the hospitality industry.

Still, and that's magic, the story of AirBnB anchors us during the selection
process online and so we're hoping for a throwback to those few real "AirBnB
moments" we had. That dream of checking into a real person's appartment,
connecting with someone beautiful on a dating app, finding a lonely place on a
crowded planet - that's their marketing's anchor, and we're now incapable of
unseeing it.

Web2 sucks because of those experiences. We came to build a new web.

### Better Signal Services

If you haven't read it yet, in fall 2020, I published an article going into the
details of why I thought web3 sucked. I claimed that "web3 is a stupid idea,"
as at the time I became convinced that browser wallet enabled websites sucked.

They were hard to create - and it felt unreasonable to sell a user on a wallet
first. Additionally, most wallet apps didn't exist on mobile yet and I felt
that truly decentralizing with a browser wasn't exactly a good technological
proposition.

Browsers, even today with crypto-native companies entering the space are puny
platforms to create actual decentralized tech infrastructure. It seemed and
still seems fundamentally off to base decentralized apps on browsers as a
computing platform.

They offer very limited networking capabilities, innovation is very much
permissioned through FAANG and anything beyond interactive user interfaces is
out of scope.

Browsers are among the best substrate for building interfaces - but not
decentralized apps.

#### My Accountant is gonna kill me

But there is an additional issue with integrating crypto currencies tightly
into web2 interaction models: It's that I'll make a user and their accountant
go crazy within a year of time - when it comes to actually filing their taxes.

Now, I could be wrong here and this is a uniquely German problem. But generally
speaking and for privacy-aware users: to circumvent metadata leakage through
correlation - "although the ledger keeps all data around" - filing crypto taxes
for an active web3 user is a nightmare. Already just to gather the respective
information for all now-broken crypto exchanges, downloading trading data has
become a nightmare. So consider the burden to file taxes for any sort of
interaction with web3 apps. To register "Soulbound tokens," or claim an NFT.

And while, of course, the government sees themselves as a sacred beacon for
data protection: It's also highly problematic that users then have to disclose
dated balance changes with up to 18 decimal precision that'll make correlation
a piece of cake.

#### Cold storage is so hot right now

An additional burden is trading-off safety and usability. Close to all of my
balances are locked cold storage - as they should be. So more often than not, I
actually Am not able to access any of my wallets. So at conferences in other
countries or when I'm on the run and only have access to my mobile: I just
can't sign in with Metamask. Or; I mean I can but it won't make sense.

This, paired with the problem of wanting to have a separate address for many
apps leads to chaos, fragmentation and bad usability. And then, to actually
make those wallets interactive - I have to sent Ether from somewhere: but it
can't be correlatable to my cold wallets ideally.

With apps like Uniswap in their infancy and crypto not being worth much, this
didn't used to be a problem. But I feel like we've crossed that line now and so
with the mainstream's awareness: It feels even more wrong to expose private
financial data to the public.

But especially identity-leveraging web3 apps have now created this trade-off
between usability and safety. Whereas the metadata correlation for using a
decentralized exchange is mostly non-problematic: As soon as someone creates a
web3 profile in a dapp this technically leaks their metadata and makes their
accounts correlatable.

So yeah: While web2 data and financial data mix well to create signal: It's in
the interest of users to expose these signals only to those with the
appropriate objectives.

#### exec defrag.exe

But this deliberate fragmentation on the account level is then essentially
institutionalized through the multichain paradigm, where not only a careless
signature missing a chain identifier can get your coins stolen: But multichain
suffers from the same usability and safety trade-off with the added dimension
of now having to take care of multiple wallets, keys and chains.

For developers, this fragmentation creates choice fatique and hinders adoption.
Why chose a layer 2 blockchain, when potentially more users are reached on
mainnet? Why use an app on Solana or Cosmos, when that means having to
replicate the entire wallet set up for securing keys, but with a slightly
different technology.

#### God safe the user experiences

But then, an additional problem is that of inheriting semi-functional
infrastructure. An example is Metamask Mobile on Android. While on iOS, upon
clicking the icon, the app boots up rather prompty, on my relatively decent
Android the same sequence can take several minutes to complete. And, after
demoing it to a friend, they concluded that Android must be the after-thought.

But I think this is a problem with far wider consequences but one bad isolated
experience on my Android phone: It becomes a systemic problem that a small
startup may not succeed to take-on.

If its strategy is to create a world-class experience for their users:
On web2, most or if not all browsers get so sufficiently out of the users' way
that a pure usability play like Figma can get big-time-aquired by Adobe after
10 years. And if you listen to that founder's story: You can observe that they
were obsessed with controlling and delivering a world class image design tool.

Although web3 offers the same promise by removing the quality threshold for
those that can gate keep experiences - WalletConnect's dialog has now over
thirteen pages on wallet apps a user can pick from - many with potentially
questionable but transitively-interacting user experiences.

So here's my point: As a dapp developer, one ought to be _very_ concerned and
advising the user which wallets to pick - as although a world-class web3
experience may be just around the corner, the wrong wallet may downgrade it
immensely.

Now, to address this problem, I see several possibilities for founders; but
first, let me get one potential solution out of the way: I don't think every
web3 company should also focus on building a vertically-integratable wallet.
It would be distractive, risky and add to the noise. But it would arguably come
with the benefit of control.

Control, that Google and Apple have today with Chrome and Safari. Control, that
they have with the App Store and the Play Store. And by making decisions in the
standard committees.

Another approach I've seen is delegation of keys. But frankly, I'm not sure how
to address the problem and it's a space where I wanna look for solutions and
organizations that do the right things.

**proof-reading until here, 2022-12-01**

### Modern DAOs Are Bullshit

But to switch up topics a little, I think it's also important to focus on
another big vertical the crypto space has given rise to and that is
decentralized autonomous organizations (short: DAOs). In the introduction of
this post, I had initially confessed to have majorily focused on investing in
projects furthering their progress. I have since then changed my mind.

On a high level, the reason I'd like to point out is that DAOs have developed
in a direction I hadn't anticipated. I actually had not foreseen plutocratic
coin-voting becoming the defacto standard of decision-making. I think I had,
instead, thought that more organizations would fundamentally adopt more
policy-focused governance processes; figure out how to make equitable decisions
without quorum voting - a lesser focus on token distributions.

Token-voting is so obviously problematic today that no conference or DAO
governance conversation takes place without mentioning it at least once. From
whale-only enforcement of proposals, to being exposed to excessive,
greater-fool token holder risk, token-voting and the modern DAO stack doesn't
seem viable to me.

With OceanDAO, I worked an entire year being paid in token. And I gladly always
sold at the day of receival to safely cover my expenses. Today, my expenses
have gladly been covered in full - probably around the 1 OCEAN/USD mark. I
actually made good money working for them - but through this, I also never had
any meaningful voting power. Ironically, they have since then shifted their
business to verticals that stopped aligning our collaboration - and so I can
gladly say that, for now, I didn't get brutally rekt in a market that has now
priced the asset at 10x less the value of my base price.

Apart from having large degrees of autonomy, in terms of receiving earmarked
funds, it's been pretty bad for them and me.

So modern DAOs are not at all what I had in mind with my previous experience in
LeapDAO. What I always had found fascinating about their Holacracy is that it
fostered governance around creating policy-making to extend a mutually-agreed
upon constitution.

So our work there ended up being rather democratic - full of debates, tough and
slow but equitable. I observed modern DAO governance conversely, with leaders
actually avoiding policy-creating governance altogether and instead
implementing unnecessary capital allocation mechanisms using Snapshot voting
for the sake of creating decentralization theatre but little meaning.

I've heard from friends that joining DAOs is still simple and a thing. I have
since then stopped. But I honestly find it overwhelming to parse the
structurelessness and the noise. DAOs have lost me for now - until I see
someone innovating on the above mentioned problems.

### Stablecoins suck

### The Future Of Work Is Flexible

Whereas I thought that work would exclusively happen online - I now tend to
believe that it'll evolve into a flexible model of being physically present and
remote work. Having worked remotely for a couple of years now, with even
renting a physical space as an air-gapped office from my personal space, while
I think that Cal Newport's Deep Work is important for getting things done, one
of the most deciding factors for success (trust) isn't built online.

Additionally, and I'm also going to extrapolate this observation to everyone in
my craft, isolation does improve intellectual output: But this voluntary
self-ostracism has many other detrimental effects that creep into other aspects
of life.

Having the privilege to uninterruptedly working from my own office space has
had the benefits of being able to concentrate well and achieve amazing
intellectual feats. But doing this for an extended period of time also meant to
me personally that I stopped being exposed to others - colleagues or friends of
friends, and so I think for my future, I'll have to improve managing my work
environment between seeking quiet spaces and exposing myself to distractive
social situations. That's why I think flexible work - what Cal Newport calls a
"Hub and Spokes model" is the future. Being able to focus, but also being able
to mingle.

#### Community Building Is More Important Than Ever

Keeping that insight in mind, it also yields an important aspect of future
project building - namely focusing on establishing a shared identity being key.

With 45% of the population now being internet natives, finding belonging in
what we believe it and who we feel being taken serious by is meaning. Those
groups have long found their way from digital into the physical space.

But remote work and the notion of sitting alone in quiet rooms for focus is a
dynamic that will inevitably also give rise to everyone appreciating physical
experiences. Or, anyways experiences that are meaningful.

It's today entirely possible to work on projects without ever opening your
mouth or showing your face - but it isn't possible to live such existence.

For me, and the projects that I want to invest it, this means that I'll keep an
eye out for those that manage to create collective meaning for their community
members. Those that make the network or the movement a central component.

### Elon's Twitter is an attempt at staking

### Crypto is a Sandbox for real-world mechanism design

### Crypto Is Now A Threat To Bigtech and TradFi

For weeks on end, Bloomberg and the besties on the All-in Podcast have been
discussing bigtech's crashing stock - all without ever considering the
strategic inflection point that has been created in crypto's last bull run.

This year only, I signed up to my bank's brokerage account to finally buy
stocks. And it hit me, that this user interface wouldn't allow buying a
fraction of Berkshire Hathaway - I either had to buy half a million of it or
none. So while apps like Robinhood, Trade Republic and others fix this user
experience disaster, it exposes the legacy that is traditional finance.

And, natively applying the "not your keys, not your coins" model to stock
brokerage - there's a deep feeling of anxiety in holding the stocks in custody.
Maybe crypto has fucked me up, but I prefer to be my own custodian.

Similarly, I think it's necesary to face the facts that crypto-original apps
are now stealing market share from Bigtech. This may at first not seem totally
obvious - but there is a big wave of re-decentralizing all Bigtech tools on the
way. This starts at simple products like plausible.io (which isn't even crypto)
and ends at outright crypto-clones like Farcaster.

The crypto way tends to make technology open source and so a decentralized
social network like Farcaster is easy to replicate for e.g. music, or video.
Crypto won't just eat away marketshare though. Music NFTs are already
qualitatively more fun than listening to Spotify. Farcaster is signal, and when
you go back to Elon's bird app - it feels like accidentialy opening up a spam
folder.

### What I'm Bullish About Web3

But then there are a few nuggets of interesting things in web3. And so after
having pointed out some of the problems, I want to now also focus on those
things that I think already make lots of sense and have potential.

#### Permissionless Standard Processes

W3C and other standard groups are full of bullshit corporate warfare and so
nothing ever gets done or decided. Ethereum's EIP process, borrowed from
Pyton's PEP, is a really interesting process for creating global schelling
points. EIP-20 and EIP-721 are great examples of what those simple and
permissionlessly-submitted documents can achieve.

#### Solidity and the EVM

Working with Solidity has been a blast. The tools have matured immensely and
complex smart contracts can now be written, packaged, tested and fuzzed. The
EVM's tooling has made a major leap forward and its still a great tool to work
with. There are many reference implementations, frameworks and its reasonably
architected. The community is active, help can be found easily and resources
for learning are available.

Using Solidity is actually fun and thinking of money during programming is an
interesting challenge that I want to do more in the future.

#### Namespaces & Authority

Peer to peer networks suffer from a lack of trustworthy authority. Since
everyone's a peer: everyone's statements weight the same. So what's great about
ledgers is that signatures can be combined with real-world value and they can
produce scarcity. A name space like the Ethereum Name Service would
legitimately not be possible without Ethereum. Proof-of-stake mechanisms create
valuable signals. Name spaces like Farcaster's identity registry or dmap make
me excited for an integration of blockchain into the more boring parts of the
computing stack.

#### Global Payments

I religiously use request.network to pay invoices globally for relatively low
transaction costs. It works really well and it's a no-brainer. They've been
taking cuts for each transaction. I've been able to hire talent from all around
the world, and the overhead of using a site like request.network is minimal.
the world, and the overhead of using a site like request.network is minimal.
the world, and the overhead of using a site like request.network is minimal.

#### Better DApp infrastructures
