# The terrible things I'd do with your money

In some of Daniel Kahnemann's books and any other business advice-type
articles, you always seem to read the same argument: The thing important people
all over the world would like to see is increased risk-taking in the workplace.

And having spent roughly seven years in the startup space, I'm starting to
agree immensely with this sentiment. It's the unique Gen Z-er feeling of
boredom, flicking through startup ideas like your Tiktok feed only to realize
that 99% of it - you've already seen it and that you're exhausted.

The craving for _true_ originality, just a little hit of dopamine for
experiencing _the new_, it has become scarily real for me not only on social
media but also in the startup space.

So let me tell you in my real voice right now, "[It fell like scales from my
eyes](https://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/r/rsv/rsv-idx?type=citation&book=Acts&chapno=9&startverse=18&endverse=20)"
when I read Nick Tredennick's "[Engineer's View of Venture
Capitalists](https://spectrum.ieee.org/amp/an-engineers-view-of-venture-capitalists-2650252508)"
article; from 2001 and saw him claim that "VCs are sheep. They don't take
risks."

Outrageous! The audacity he has to make such claims! After all, in terms of the
type of investments, aren't VCs quasi _the_ risk-takers that keep our economy
going?

## "VCs are sheep."

But Nick's right. Particularly when focusing our attention on what really gets
funded and who are the new hot companies. Already the mainstream terminology
makes me wanna throw up: "Unicorn!" ðŸ¤®

Because, yes, after having hot meals delivered to your house and that
absolutely _not_ going great for years: Why not try now also to deliver cold
food (aka. groceries) too but under a different brand name and a slightly
adjusted business process.

And since this article is about keeping you engaged through quantitative
originality, just tangentially, maybe conspiracies are popular these days
because they're less boring than reality!

But yes, this is what it has come to: In Europe, the hot "tech" Unicorns are:
"Gorillaz," "Flink," and "Getir" - all grocery delivery startups with exactly
the same market positioning and value proposition. They deliver food on bikes.

But not only does this situation confirm that VCs are indeed sheep, that they
all _baa_ the minute one _baas_ - it also shows the level of risk aversion they
exhibit.

Sure, here and there may be investors that fund radically new ideas, but isn't
it interesting that the evolutionary output VCs are curating usually just
bubbles up boring stuff?

## VCs don't take (enough) risks. And neither do startup founders.

It's funny because it's true. In a way, the annoying South African dude on
Twitter and the notorious lying woman posing as female Steve Jobs did/do one
thing well: They've both gone all-in; mega bold and despite the odds stacked
against them.

As an engineer that has been [kept in check by founders and
managers](/2021/10/21/on-chain-the-emperor-wears-no-clothes/) for years - since
they always want you to factor in the business side while developing tech, I
admire the boldness of _true_ risk-takers â€” the insanity of wanting to settle
on Mars or to blood-test everyone with a tiny pinch.

Sometimes, when I get told by my collaborators to deleverage risk; when they
want me to ship something visible instead of going for my wildest technical
dreams - when I want to [blow up the scope](/2021/06/18/when-scope-blows-up/),
but they won't allow me, _I dream of the terrible things I'd do with their
money_.

## The Utopia of Creative Freedom

I dream of the freedom to work on what I think is right - for how long I think
is good.

I dream of not owing responsibility to my employers or financiers. The utopia
of creative freedom, where no budget limitations, no sense of scarcity, or fear
of failure exists.

I dream of a place where financiers understand my desire to take risks, a place
where not only engineers have empathy towards the business but vice versa.

It's there where I'd waste _your_ hard-earned dollars on days of "unnecessary"
and tangential work.

It's where I'd rent servers to compute seemingly useless shit - where I'd blow
tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere just to gather more, to you,
_irrelevant information_.

If I had all the creative freedom in the world, I'd do "terrible" things with
the money you invested.

---

published 2022-04-15 by timdaub
