# The Red Wave That Killed The Ocean DAO

### .i

Between the end of 2020 and beginning of 2022, as part of a DAO-subsidized
project, I worked on rugpullindex.com, a rating agency for publicly traded data
sets. OceanDAO, the organization funding our work, had been set up around the
same time and provided a fixed pool of funding every month. We, the RPI, were
building core Ocean Protocol infrastructure and the OceanDAO funded our work
upon request.

In detail, for each month Ocean Protocol fixed a total pool in dollars and then
requested projects to submit proposals to their Discourse forum. OceanDAO
called itself "grants funding." This, and the fact that we all didn't know each
other meant that project proposals consisted of the founder's track records. As
the pool size grew quickly, and since a few low-quality projects managed to
sneak through the process initially, this quickly took the application process
ad absurdum. While initially, projects genuinely tried to build raport and
track records with the community, once an established template for supposed
success became aparent, new, anonymous project founders flocked to the forum
and submitting outrageous project ideas.

![Rug Pull Index's DAO proposals](../../assets/images/rpi-dao-proposals.png)

It was during this time when RPI's month-long raport building and community
presence paid off. With an cash-basis accounting spreadsheet I had made public
from the get-go, and that I updated throughout the process, we delivered
unmatched financial transparency when projects left and right did questionable
token deals. Like a great boxer, Rug Pull Index applied to 12 rounds and won
them all. Looking back, it's truly an achievement I'm proud of and that I'm
grateful for experiencing it.


### .ii

It was also during this time that I truly struggled with the challenges work
threw at me. See, there is something insanely humbling about writing a 5 page
proposal about your project every month, releasing it to the community of a
protocol token then worth half a Billion USD, and then getting grilled on its
validity. It was only topped with the OceanDAO snapshot votes, which were timed
to occur on weekends to increase voter turnout. And please consider, I had no
alternative options of income at the time. Me, and my colleagues, we had
committed ourselves to the Ocean Protocol vision and we were dependent on the
DAO voting outcome to pay our bills!

And it is actually great, because having such skin in the game truly brings out
a different self - one that is aligned with the incentives of the game. It was
during that time when I read through Brene Brown's "Dare to lead," a self-help
text on how to lead with vulnerability. I had taken it with me on my short
vacation in Italy. This book and my laptop, to make sure the site wouldn't go
down.

Since it talked about leading with vulnerability, I still remember this one
pivotal moment when she talks about the power drawn from walking vulnerably
into the arena, being carefully observed for weaknesses from all angles -
facing attacks. This image, to me was submitting my project's numbers monthly
to the OceanDAO. It was fantastic for my startup but it felt awful to me
personally. And so this time during the weekend OceanDAO votes were times of
rising emotions, with some moments, I regret to say, situations I'm not proud
of anymore.

### .iii

But all of this is still just a set up really to the actual story that I want
to tell. See, with the DAO vote each month becoming more and more competitive,
while the DAO politics started to shift into toxicity, I believe there was one
pivotal moment in the OceanDAO's history that ultimately made it fail. It was
Round 10. See, before, all other rounds had still been relatively relaxed.
People knew each other, the DAO community had been cohesive and so while
politics came more into focus, a lot of faction building had lead to fairly
reliable returns for many of the early projects, including Rug Pull Index.

The politics where such that all of the big OCEAN token holders who also voted
were known and so a successful round was produced by bonding over data economy
visions and building rapport. In one round particularly, I remember the
community getting together over a convention of providing qualitative negative
feedback over nominal negative feedback via voting. But then came Round 10.

### .iv

Now, there had been shenanigans in prior rounds too, such as to collude to
slash dishonest proposal submitters. But those actions were usually somewhat
open secrets that the community's majority stood behind. But then, overnight in
Round 10 an unexpected sea of red "No" votes flooded all proposal ballots and
at one point it looked like no one would get funding.

Coincidentially, this happened with priorly a rule being introduced to the
OceanDAO vote that permitted voters to burn the monthly pool instead of
allocating it to projects. Being active on social media at the time, upon
requesting disclosure, some anonymous accounts told me: We want to burn the
round's pool. There are too many scam projects and our token investments are
getting inflated!

At the time, and honestly today too, this sounded like bullshit. The concept of
a token is to provide liquidity to its protocol team do use it for innovation.
If innovation isn't happening, the token isn't worth anything, considering that
Ocean Protocol hadn't yet found product market fit. It seemed absurd to me that
a rational Ocean token holder would vote "No" on all projects, when
additionally there had been at least a few good projects committing to the
monthly schedule.

### .v

The post mortem of this event was sadly terrible. Despite many calling for it,
the Ocean Protocol didn't take this vote of confidence serious but continued on
their trajectory. A proper analysis was never published and it remains unclear
until today who was behind this "sea of red." My headline reads: "How a
snapshot vote removed 200M from our Protocol." It is this story. 

![Ocean Protocol's Market Capitalization](../../assets/images/ocean-marketcap.png)

While, at the
beginning of November 2021, OCEAN's market cap had still been around $400M, the
OceanDAO did continue for another 14 rounds. By the time it was closed down,
Ocean Protocol's token had lost $300M in market cap, with OceanDAO rounds being
conducted with much less liberty than in those early days.

### .vi

I wrote this story down, because I think there's a lesson here. First of all, I
do have to mention that I've overdramatized it and that the Ocean Protocol lost
a lot of its market capitalization also by being exposed to the overall crypto
macro.


But qualitatively, as an early OceanDAO contributor, I do believe that Round 10
marked the beginning of the end. It's because this was when the trust in the
legitimacy of Snapshot voting was shattered in front of an entire community's
eyes. Had people before still celebrated this innovation of funds allocation,
it now dawned upon all of us that something was fundamentally off. The fact
that we, the builders were so fundamentally exposed to the will of one or many
unaccountable and anonymous whales changed, I think, in many how they saw
themselves as warriors in the arena.

We all went in there, in the arena, completely naked and vulnerable. We did it
because we trusted the process, and that those who appeared with a pure
conscience would be spared from the crowd's madness. They'd be elevated to the
Olymp. And this worked many times, so we built trust. I admit, we might have
gotten negligent too. But that's why when the hammer came down on us in Round
10, it realigned the entire community's power struction with many orienting
themselves towards exit and not commitment.

---

published 2023-01-28 by timdaub
