# About the Urgency of building Web3

After the many months of an uninterrupted bull market, I think I can speak for
all of us and say: "We're exhausted!"

During the bull, everything looks like an opportunity and winners are bubbling
up at an accelerated pace. Noise is high and so to stand out, everyone does
whatever it takes to cut through the bullshit.

After all, every chain could be the next Ethereum. Every project, the next
Uniswap and every founder, the next Jeffrey, JEFFREY BEZOOOS.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/lI5w2QwdYik" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

But, really, how urgently do we have to ship? How important is it to have
success now versus having it later? Does the crypto super bull hold the chance
of our lifetime? Or is any time a good time to start something new?

## The Value of FOMO

FOMO, or the "fear of missing out," is a prevalently millennial-produced
emotion that describes the anxiety arising in internet users when spectating on
their fun-having f(r)iends through social apps like Instagram, Facebook and
others.

Y'all know it. It starts by excusing yourself on the group chat for "having no
time to join," only to later realize that you must have missed out ON THE
SOCIAL HAPPENING OF THE MONTH when checking their awesome pictures, snaps and
stories.

It seems that in 2021, we should know better, though. I've described the
underlying phenomenon in another one of my posts and titled it ["NFTs are
coming for Instagram and other social media
platforms"](https://timdaub.github.io/2021/07/21/nfts-are-coming-for-instagram/).

The post tells the story of how we distort our realities with social media
usage and that our yacht-boarding idols; Maybe they're not so glamorous after
all. Maybe, besides their many followers, all they truly have is the knowledge
of how to look amazing online.

And so, I think acknowledging this type of contemporary social flexing, we
should manage to identify FOMO-induced urgency during the crypto bull market
too.

## Urgency is FOMO; And FOMO isn't a good decision-making criteria.

Yes, really, urgency is a more defined version of anxiety or _fear of missing
out_. It promotes the infamous 'ape-ing'. It's the natural signal of our body
telling us that our lives are threatened because we're about to miss out. Our
brains scream: "Hey! LOOK THERE! Others are feasting on some delicious berries
or whatever! GET IN THERE NOOOOW!"

And so, the natural reaction is to do exactly that. FOMO, it's the reason we had
no toilet paper in the beginning of 2020. It's sadly also of existential matter
to the functioning of the crypto bull market.

Personally, I've learned in my career, though, that acting on emotions isn't
always a good choice to make quality decisions. Indeed, I noticed that the less
irrational and the more grounded in reality I made past decisions, the higher
quality they ended up being over the long run.

## "First-mover advantage"

In venture capital, they've even managed to name the concept. If you're into
their type of talk, you might know that sometimes they talk about "First- and
last-mover advantages."

Their stories? That Facebook and Google only became successful for building the
respective "last" search engine and social network.

Legend has it that Larry and Sergey discovered their edge in the market by
being "late to the party" and fixing search engines' low-quality results by
improving "10x" upon the problem by inventing PageRank.

Sure, Yahoo and AlterVista were also interested in high-quality results. But by
being so much better, Google simply made them irrelevant.

## Crypto's First Movers

As a long-time lurker, I think similar things have already happened in the
cryptosphere too. Case in point: Those popular in crypto weren't its first
movers.

Actually, many of the space's former figureheads, its "first-movers," have
failed to retain relative relevancy, in my opinion. It'd be a bit mean to name
some here, but I invite you to trust my argument.

Those that are at the space's top today aren't those that were impactful back
then. Indeed, today's crypto celebs seem to have emerged only recently. And
that makes sense, too, given that DeFi, for example, is a very emergent sub
field.

Back in 2016 and earlier, my impression today is that crypto was rather
governed by "weirdos" living on tight spectrums. Funnily enough, some of the
sphere's most (in)famous are now dead, in jail or have moved on entirely. I've
written about that idea before too, it's what I tried to say with ["Ethereum
isn't fun
anymore."](https://timdaub.github.io/2021/02/22/ethereum-isnt-fun-anymore/)

## About the Urgency of building Web3

So then, is it necessary to act on our urgency when building web3? Is it worth
prioritizing shipping above anything else? Personal well-being? Quality?
Values?

I'd say no.

In my opinion, the hearts and minds of any industry are won by deliberate
long-term commitment and continuous meaningful contributions.

Doesn't success come down to trust built between people? And doesn't that take
lots of time?

I believe so, and that's why I want to reject the notion of urgency. I want to
reject the idea that today is a more unique time to start something new than
any other day. I want to believe that today is as good of a time to start
something new as any other day.

And that's why I think there's no urgency in building web3. WAGMI.
